Expressions are the hidden gem of After
Effects, which a lot of animators avoid
or neglect because they see it as too
technical. Although mastering
expressions is technical, there are
still many basic expressions that even
someone with zero knowledge of
programming can use. Expressions are
great if used effectively because they
can reduce the amount of key frames in
your scene, keeping things tidy. I'm
simply going to show you a scene that
I've animated using my most commonly
used expressions and walk you through
how each one works. This should give you
a good starting point to go and learn
more. Let's jump in.
[Music]
Okay, so once you've got the project
open, you want to open the fairground
scene composition here. And let's take a
look at this spinning ferris wheel
first.
So if we come down to the layer view
down here and we select wheel outlines,
let's click this dot here so that only
the wheel is visible. And now if we
press play, we've just got that wheel
rotating. Let's click on this layer
again, press R, and twirl down this
expression view here. And here we can
see our expression. Now let's remove
this expression here by just
highlighting it and pressing backspace.
I want you to just type in a number here
like 50 and then click off. If you look
here at the rotation, it's set our
rotation to the number we've entered
here. So any expression you write is
essentially just a more complicated way
of setting the rotation to a specific
value. To make it spin, we're going to
use the time property. So to demonstrate
what the time property is actually
doing, I'm going to create a text field
here and just call it time. Let's make
it a little bigger. Let's scale it up.
I'm going to twirl down the layer here.
I'm going to twirl down text. And I'm
going to hold alt and click on source
text. And we're going to type in here
time. I'm going to click off. You can
see here as we now move our playhead,
the text field is changing based on the
current time of our playhead. So that's
essentially what the time field does. So
let's remove that text layer. Let's go
back to our wheel and into our
expression field here where we've
written 50. And if we just backspace
this and type time and click off and we
press space, you can see it's very
slowly turning. So to speed this up, we
need to multiply this value by
something. So let's say time 30. And now
if we press play, you can see it spins
quite quickly. So to make this a bit
more readable, we're going to create a
variable to store this value 30 in. So,
let's go to the start of this line and
press space to move it down. Let's go up
a line. Let's type turn speed
equals 30.
And then press semicolon. Now, let's go
back to this line and replace 30 with
turn speed. And let's also end with a
semicolon. Now, if we click off, the
script still does exactly the same
thing, except we can now change this
turn speed to whatever value we want.
And it's much more obvious what this
value is. So let's unsolo this layer now
by clicking this dot again.
And let's select this boat layer here.
And let's solo this layer and press
play. So we've got a swinging motion
here. So let's select this layer and
again open up the rotation property and
twirl down the expression. So here we
have two key frames. one set to minus
35° on the rotation and one set to +
35°. If we wanted to do this using key
frames, we'd have to have many many key
frames where we'd have - 35, 35, - 35,
35, etc., etc., etc., over and over
again. But you can see we've only got
two key frames here and it's just
looping it. So, if we remove this
expression here by just clicking it and
backspacing and click off and now we
play,
you can see it just stops here. So,
we're going to add the loop out
expression. So, if we hold alt and click
on the stopwatch here next to rotation
and let's try typing loop out and
semicolon. Now, if we play, doesn't look
quite right. This is because it is
literally looping the two key frames we
have. So, if we go from our first key
frame to our second key frame and then
instantly jump back to our first, you
can see it's just jumping back. We
wanted to go from our first key frame to
our second and then back to our first
like that and then back to our second.
So to do that we need to add a type
parameter within our loop out
expression. So we can click inside these
parentheses here and we can type.
Now if we say equals and we open speech
marks we can say ping pong.
Now if we click off and we press space
we have the desired behavior.
There are a few different types. For
instance, we can change this pingpong to
offset.
And now if we play, what offset does is
it takes the value and it just keeps
going with it.
We can also write cycle, but this is
just the default option that we explored
earlier. So when we typed when we didn't
have a type, that was essentially cycle.
So that's when it jumps back to the
start. So loop out loops everything
after the final key frame. Let's change
this back to ping pong
and let's change to loop in.
Now if we press play, nothing seems to
happen. That's because loop in actually
loops before the first key frame. So if
we highlight our key frames and drag
them further along the playhead and we
press play, you can see it's looping
before the first key frame instead of
after it.
So again, let's go back to our boat
layer and unsolo it.
Let's take a look at the hot air balloon
here. So let's go to the balloon layer
and let's solo that. Let's toggle the
position property and toggle down the
expression window here. So we've added a
wiggle expression to the position
property of the balloon. This
essentially gives the balloon random
movement. Let's remove this wiggle
expression for now and click off. And
you can see now the balloon isn't moving
at all. Let's start fresh. Hold alt and
click the stopwatch by the position
property.
And let's type wiggle
and open close parenthesis and
semicolon. And now let's click off. Now
nothing happens because there are
certain parameters which are actually
required inside the wiggle expression. A
bit like when we had the type property
in the loop out expression except the
type property was optional whereas with
the wiggle expression there are required
parameters. So you can see if you read
the error here, wiggle needs between two
and five arguments. So we're going to
add two arguments to this. So the two
parameters we're going to add to this
are essentially the frequency of the
movement and the amplitude of the
movement. We had one as our frequency
and then we type comma and we put five.
This is essentially saying that the
frequency is one and the amplitude is
five which means every 1 seconds we want
our object to move by a factor of five.
So if we click off now and we press
space, you can see there's some slight
movement going on here. I think we
should up the amplitude as the movement
is very subtle here. Let's try 15 for
the second parameter.
Yeah, that's a bit better. So if someone
was to look at this expression, it might
be a little confusing. So we're going to
make it a bit more readable for any
potential reader. So we're going to go
to the start of the wiggle line and
press enter to make a new line above it.
And we're going to make some variables
here like we did with the rotation speed
for the ferris wheel. So, we're going to
make a variable called frequency,
and we're going to set it equal to one,
and we're going to finish with a
semicolon. Now, we're going to make a
variable called amplitude, and we're
going to set it equal to five. Now, 15,
and we're going to finish with a
semicolon. Now, in our wiggle
expression, we can reference these
variables instead of writing the value,
which makes it more readable for anyone
looking at your expression. So let's
replace this one with frequency and
replace this 15 with amplitude.
So that's essentially so these are
essentially referring back to our
variables here. When the script is
compiled, this frequency will be
replaced with whatever value we set
here. So if we click off again and we
press space, the behavior is exactly the
same, but the code is just more readable
here. So there's one more problem we
need to solve here with the wiggle
expression. Currently, if we unsolo this
layer, our animation seamlessly loops.
So, if we go to 30 seconds, which is the
end of our composition, and we press
space,
the balloon kind of jumps. It does not
seamlessly loop, whereas everything else
does. And this is because the wiggle
expression produces random movement. And
so, the end isn't necessarily going to
line up with the start. So, to make the
animation seamlessly loop, we need to
ramp up the randomness at the start and
then ramp it down at the end. so that at
either end the randomness is zero and
therefore it will loop seamlessly.
So to do that we're going to create a
null layer. We're going to add a slider
to it and we're going to use that slider
to control the strength of the wiggle.
So if you click this wiggle control
layer here and delete it because we're
going to start from scratch. Now let's
go to layer new null object. Let's
rename this layer to wiggle
control
and let's move it above our balloon
layer. Now let's go to effect
expression controls
slider control. Let's click on this
wiggle control layer and press E to
bring up our slider control. Let's twirl
it down. And here we have our slider. So
we're going to key frame the amplitude
using this slider. So let's go to the
start of the animation and we're going
to key frame zero. Now let's go to 1
second in and let's key frame a value of
15. And then we want to do the opposite
at the end of the animation. So let's
highlight these two key frames. Ctrl +
C. Move to 29 seconds. Ctrl +V. Now
let's rightclick these key frames. Key
frame assistant time reverse key frames.
So now we've got a starting value of
zero. The slider then goes up to 15 and
stays there for the majority of the
animation. And then at the end the
slider value goes from 15 back to zero.
So, we're going to set the amplitude to
be controlled by this slider value. So,
to do that, if we go back to our balloon
layer to the position expression, let's
select the amplitude value here, which
we set to 15, and we're going to
highlight it. Then, we're going to use
the expression pickhip and we're going
to hold and drag and drag it onto the
slider value. Now, you can see here it's
added a bit of code, which is a
reference to that slider value. to test
that it's looping seamlessly. Now, we
can press end and home on a Windows
keyboard. Not sure what that would be on
a Mac keyboard, but these are just
shortcuts which take you to the start
and the end of the composition. So,
we're going to press end and home. And
you can see that as we toggle between
the start and the end of the
composition, the balloon is stay in
exactly the same place and therefore you
know that the animation is looping
seamlessly. And in the middle, the
balloon is wiggling around nicely. So to
help you understand the code that this
pwit automatically generated, we're
going to just rewrite it ourselves. So
we want to get the wiggle control layer.
So to do this, we just want to write
this comp which is basically saying
within this composition, we want to get
a certain layer. So dot layer and then
we need to specify the name of the layer
and we do that within the parenthesis.
So we open the parenthesis, we type some
speech marks and we type name of the
layer. So we we know the layer is called
wiggle control. Now we've got the layer,
but we want to get the specific slider
control effect within that layer. So we
need to now type dot effect and open
parenthesis again. And in here we need
to type which effect. It's the slider
control effect. So a slider control
effect can have multiple sliders. So now
we need to specify the name of the
slider. So, we're just going to open the
parenthesis again, and we're going to
add some quotation marks, and we're
going to write slider, which is the name
here of our slider. And finally, we want
to add a semicolon. And if we now click
off, you can see now this is working as
intended. So, this expression pick whip
here just automatically generates this
code for you, but you could just as
easily write it yourself.
Okay, so you may have noticed that there
are these clouds slowly moving
horizontally across the screen. And
that's also done using expressions.
Let's go into the clouds composition
down here. And in here, we have two
pre-MPS called cloud row. So let's go
into one of these. And in here, we
simply have three shape layers, all of
which are stationary within this pre-MP.
So let's back out of this pre-MP. We've
actually applied our expression to the
pre-MP itself. So for now, let's delete
the first one. I'll explain why later.
Click this one and press P. I've
separated the position dimensions into X
and Y and I've added an expression to
the X position. So, if we open up the
expression for the X position and click
here, here is our expression. It's four
lines long. Let's scrap what we've got
here so I can walk you through the
process. So, we want this composition to
move across the screen over a certain
amount of time. So, to do that, we're
going to use the linear expression. So,
if we type linear and then open and
close parenthesis. Now, in here, we're
going to have a series of arguments or
parameters, a bit like we did with the
wiggle statement where we had two
different parameters separated by
commas. So, the first one is going to be
the speed of the animation. So, for now,
we're just going to set that to time,
which we covered earlier. So, the next
parameters are going to be the start and
end time of this linear movement. So,
our composition is 30 seconds long. So,
we're going to start at zero and end at
30. The next parameters will be which
position we want to start in and which
position we want to end in. So let's for
instance put zero as the start position
and 1920 as the end position and 1920 is
the size of our composition in width.
Now let's add a semicolon finally to the
end and click off. If we click this
toggle mask and shape path visibility we
can see the border of our pre-MP slide
through the timeline here. We can see
that between 0 and 30 seconds these
clouds move all the way across the
screen. Now we want this to be a
seamless loop. So when these clouds are
here we want some more clouds to be
appearing to the left. So let's
duplicate this composition cloud row by
clicking on it and pressing Ctrl D and
then let's open up the expression for
this layer. If we want this composition
to start to the left here and then
finish in the center, we want to change
the start and end position parameters
here. So we want this to start at minus
1920 and finish at zero. Now if we click
off, you can see here starts to both
move across like this. And now if we
press home and end, we can see they're
both exactly the same, which means it
loops seamlessly. Now these expressions
are completely functional and we could
just leave it there. We also want to try
and make it more readable for anyone
else who comes across our expression and
wants to understand how it's working. So
to do that, we're going to go to the
start of this linear line and press
enter a few times to make some lines
before. And let's create some variables.
So let's create start time
and set it to zero. Let's create end
time and set it to 30. Let's create
start position and set it to minus 1920.
And let's create end position and set it
to zero. So now let's replace these
values that we put into the expression
with the variables that we've just
created. So instead of zero, we'll put
start time. Instead of 30, we'll put end
time. Instead of start pause, we'll put
start pause. And instead of zero, we'll
put end pause. Now, if we click off
here, works exactly the same, but it
just looks neater. And to someone
reading it, they understand that this
zero means the start time. They
understand that this 30 means the end
time, etc. Now, let's copy all of this.
Go to our other pre-MP and delete and
replace. But we want to then change
the start and end position to zero and
1920 for this one. And there you go.
These clouds now move from left to right
and they move seamlessly. If we wanted
to control the speed of the movement, we
can create a speed variable and set it
to I don't know three. And then we can
multiply this time by our speed variable
by typing asterisk or multiply and then
speed.
So the next expression we're going to
look at is value at time. So the best
way for me to explain this is actually
to create a new composition. So if we
come here and we press create new
composition and let's type in value at
time. Let's create a new shape layer
here of a sphere. And let's come down
here and duplicate that layer and move
it across a bit. And let's change its
color, I don't know, to something else.
Now I want to add some opacity key
frames here. So select both of the
shapes, press T, and click opacity. So
we've added a key frame here for 100%
opacity. So, let's just zoom in here a
bit on the timeline. And let's go to 1
second in and set a key frame for zero
opacity. And then at 2 seconds in, let's
set another key frame for 100% opacity.
Now, let's just set the end point of
this composition to 4 seconds. So, let's
move our cursor here to 4 seconds and
press N on the keyboard. And you can see
now we have this animation where the
circles go from 100 to 0 to 100. Say we
want to offset the opacity animation for
one of these circles so it happens
slightly after. We could do this.
But this can get quite messy especially
if we have many many layers and we need
to manually drag all of the key frames
forward a little bit like like so. And
then if we have all of these animations
staggered, it can be quite hard to tweak
the animation because say we want to
highlight all of the final key frames.
Look, it gets quite messy if we're
trying to just grab these ones at the
end. So let's just z until we get back
to our two shape layers here. A better
way of offsetting the animation is to
use the value at time expression.
instead of dragging our key frames
forward, what we're instead going to do
is we're going to add a expression to
the opacity key frame here. So if we
press alt and click the stopwatch and we
type here value at time and in here we
simply need to specify time then plus or
minus a certain value. So we can move
these key frames forward in time or
backwards in time. So for example, if we
do here time minus and then we play the
animation, you can see that this
animation is now delayed by 1 second.
And we get to keep all our key frames
nice and tidy, which means if we want to
make this part of the animation longer,
for example, it's much easier than if
the key frames are staggered. So let's
come back to the fairground scene and
open the lights composition. You might
have to zoom in a bit here into this
composition.
So, this is essentially what I've done
for all of these light layers. So, in
the layer view here, we've got a layer
for each light and then a controller for
the lights on the left and a controller
for the lights on the right. I've
essentially done here what we just did
in the other composition. So, if you
highlight some of these lights and you
press T to pull up the opacity and then
open the expression panel, you can see
here we've done exactly what we did in
the previous example. The only
difference is if you open up each of the
expressions, they have a slightly
different value for the delay. You can
see here it's time minus.15,
time minus30, time minus.60, timeus.75.
And so each of the lights is delayed by
a different value. And that's what gives
it this effect.
So before we move on to the last
example, I want to show you something
really useful for learning new
expressions.
Let's go back into this lights
composition. If we take one of these
layers which has an expression on it and
we twirl down the expression next to the
expression here we can see an arrow
which says expression language menu and
in here we can see many different
presets of expressions. For example
under interpolation we can see the
expression we used earlier linear and we
can see ease here and ease is just like
linear except it has some ease added to
the start and end. And you can see the
many different variants of the linear
and ease expressions. Under key you can
see the time property that we use. So, I
want you to choose a few of these and
just experiment with them and see what
they do.
So, I want you to select this sun layer
here and press R and open up the
expression menu. And in here, we've got
a similar expression to what we had in
the ferris wheel. Time times a value,
which just makes the sun spin. But
because the sun's anchor point is on the
ground, it spins round in an orbit
rather than at its center point. Let's
look at this shadow layer here. If we
open the rotation expression, what we've
done here is we've actually set the
rotation of the shadow to be equal to
the rotation of the sun, which is how it
sort of moves around in the same way as
the sun. So, let's delete this
expression and do it from scratch. So,
the simple way we can do it is to simply
use the expression pick whip. So, this
whip here, and we can drag that onto the
rotation of the sun. And there we go.
That's done. Except you need to add a
semicolon to the end. That's the only
thing. And that's how easy it can be.
So, but just to refresh your memory of
the essentials, let's type it out
ourselves. So, we want to say this
composition dot
layer. We know the layer is called sun.
We know the property we want to get is
the rotation. So, we're going to type
dot transform.rotation.
And then we're going to add a semicolon.
There we go. That's the same as using
the pick whip. If you're wondering how
I've gotten the shadow to only appear
where the ground is, if you press the
shadow layer and press E, I've used an
effect here called set mat. And this
effectively says only show this layer
where another layer is present. So this
take mat from layer property I've set to
ground. And that's why it only appears
where the ground is. I hope this has
given you a good introduction to some
common expressions and how they can be
used. I've added some links to some
reading materials in the description
below if you want to learn more. Be sure
to like the video, guys, as it really
helps me out. Hit the bell for
notifications of future videos and
subscribe to see more content. See you
on the flippity flop.